Short Questions of Digital Communication
UNIT 1: PULSE MODULATION
1. Define Nyquist rate.
Ans: Let the signal be band limited to “W” Hz. Then Nyquist rate is given as,
Nyquist rate = 2W samples/sec
Aliasing will not take place if sampling rate is greater than Nyquist rate.
2. What is meant by aliasing effect?
Ans: Aliasing effect takes place when sampling frequency is less than Nyquist rate. Under such
condition, the spectrum of the sampled signal overlaps with itself. Hence higher frequencies take the
form of lower frequencies. This interference of the frequency components is called as aliasing effect.
3. Define PWM.
Ans: PWM is basically pulse width modulation. Width of the pulse changes according to amplitude
of the modulating signal. It is also referred as pulse duration modulation or PDM.
4. State Sampling theorem.
Ans: A band limited signal of finite energy, which has no frequency components higher than W Hz,
may be completely recovered from the knowledge of its samples taken at the rate of 2W samples per
second.
5. Mention the merits of DPCM. (Differential pulse-code modulation)
Ans: 1. Bandwidth requirement of DPCM is less compared to PCM.
2. Quantization error is reduced because of prediction filter
3. Numbers of bits used to represent one sample values are also reduced compared to PCM.
6. What is the main difference in DPCM and DM? (Differential pulse-code modulation and
Delta Modulation)
Ans: DM encodes the input sample by one bit. It sends the information about + δ or -δ, i.e. step rise
or fall. DPCM can have more than one bit of encoding the sample. It sends the information about
difference between actual sample value and the predicted sample value.
7. How the message can be recovered from PAM?
Ans: The message can be recovered from PAM by passing the PAM signal through
reconstruction filter integrates amplitude of PAM pulses. Amplitude reconstruction signal is done to
remove amplitude discontinuities due to pulses.
8. What is meant by quantization?
Ans: While converting the signal value from analog to digital, quantization is performed. The analog
value is assigned to nearest digital value. This is called quantization. The quantized value is then
converted into equivalent binary value. The quantization levels are fixed depending upon the number
of bits. Quantization is performed in every Analog to Digital Conversion.
9. The signal to quantization noise ratio in a PCM system depends on what criteria?
Ans: The signal to quantization noise ratio in PCM is given as, (S/N)db ≤(4.8+6v)dB
Here v is the number of bits used to represent samples in PCM. Hence signal to quantization noise
ratio in PCM depends upon the number of bits or quantization levels
10. What is meant by adaptive delta modulation?
Ans: In adaptive delta modulation, the step size is adjusted as per the slope of the input signal. Step
size is made high if slope of the input signal is high. This avoids slope overload distortion.
11. What is the advantage of delta modulation over pulse modulation schemes?
Ans: Delta modulation encodes one bit per samples. Hence signalling rate is reduced in DM.
12. What should be the minimum bandwidth required to transmit a PCM channel?
Ans: The minimum transmission bandwidth in PCM is given as,
BT = vW
Here v is the number of bits used to represent one pulse. W is the maximum signal frequency.
13. What is the advantage of delta modulation over PCM?
Ans: Delta modulation uses one bit to encode on sample. Hence bit rate of delta modulation is low
compared to PCM.
14. What are the two limitations of delta modulation?
Ans: 1 Slope of overload distortion. 2. Granular noise.
15. What are the advantages of the Delta modulation?
Ans: 1. Delta modulation transmits only one bit for one sample. Thus the signaling rate and
transmission channel bandwidth is quite small for delta modulation.
2. The transmitter and receiver implementation is very much simple for delta modulation.
There is no analog to digital converter involved in delta modulation.
UNIT 2: BASEBAND PULSE TRANSMISSION
1. What is intersymbol interference in baseband binary PAM systems?
Ans: In baseband binary PAM, symbols are transmitted one after another. These symbols are
separated by sufficient time durations. The transmitter, channel and receiver acts as a filter to this
baseband data. Because of the filtering characteristics, transmitted PAM pulses are spread in time.
2. What are eye pattern?
Ans: Eye pattern is used to study the effect of ISI in baseband transmission.
1) Width of eye opening defines the interval over which the received wave can be sampled without
error from ISI.
2) The sensitivity of the system to timing error is determined by the rate of closure of the eye as the
sampling time is varied.
3) Height of the eye opening at sampling time is called margin over noise.
3. Why do you need adaptive equalization in a switched telephone network?
Ans: In switched telephone network the distortion depends upon
1) Transmission characteristics of individual links.
2) Number of links in connection.
Hence fixed pair of transmit and receive filters will not serve the equalization problem. The
transmission characteristics keep on changing. Therefore adaptive equalization is used.
4. What are the necessity of adaptive equalization?
Ans: Most of the channels are made up of individual links in switched telephone
network, the distortion induced depends upon
1 ) transmission characteristics of individual links
2) number of links in connection
5. Define the principle of adaptive equalization?
Ans: The filters adapt themselves to the dispersive effects of the channel that is the coefficients of
the filters are changed continuously according to the received data. The filter coefficients are changed
in such a way that the distortion in the data is reduced.
6. Define duobinary encoding?
Ans: Duobinary encoding reduces the maximum frequency of the base band signal the “word duo”
means to the double transmission capacity of the binary system.
7. Define the term ISI?
Ans: The presence of outputs due to other bits interference with the output of
required bit this effect is called inter symbol interference (ISI).
8. Write the performance of data transmission system using eye pattern technique?
Ans: The width of the eye opening defines the interval over which the received wave can be sampled
without error from inter symbol interference. The sensitivity of the system to timing error is
determined by the rate of closure of the eye as the sampling time is varied.
9. What is the necessity of equalization?
Ans: When the signal is passed through the channel distortion is introduced in terms of
1) amplitude
2) delay this distortion creates problem of ISI.
The detection of the signal also become difficult this distraction can be compensated with the help of
equalizer.
10. What is raised cosine spectrum?
Ans: In the raised cosine spectrum, the frequency response P(f) decreases towards zero gradually
That is there is no abrupt transition.
11. What is nyquist Bandwidth?
Ans: The Bo is called nyquist bandwidth. The nyquist bandwidth is the minimum transmission
bandwidth for zero ISI.
UNIT 3: PASSBAND DELTA TRANSMISSION
1. Mention the need of optimum transmitting and receiving filter in baseband data
transmission.
Ans: When binary data is transmitted over the baseband channel, noise interfaces with it. Because of
this noise interference, errors are introduced in signal detection. Optimum filter performs two
functions while receiving the noisy signal:
1) Optimum filter integrates the signal during the bit interval and checks the output at the time instant
where signal to noise ratio is maximum.
2) Transfer function of the optimum filter is selected so as to maximize signal to noise ratio.
3) Optimum filter minimizes the probability of error
2. Define ASK.
Ans: In ASK, carrier is switched on when binary 1 is to be transmitted and it is switched off when
binary D is to be transmitted ASK is also called on-off keying.
3. What is meant by DPSK?
Ans: In DPSK, the input sequence is modified. Let input sequence be 𝑑(𝑡) and output sequence be
𝑏(𝑡). Sequence 𝑏(𝑡) changes level at the beginning of each interval in which 𝑑(𝑡) = 1 and it does
not changes level when 𝑑(𝑡) = 0. When 𝑏(𝑡) changes level, phase of the carrier is changed. And as
stated above, 𝑏(𝑡) changes 𝑡. its level only when 𝑑(𝑡) = 1. This means phase of the carrier is
changed only if 𝑑(𝑡) = 1. Hence the technique is called Differential PSK.
4. Explain coherent detection?
Ans: In coherent detection, the local carrier generated at the receiver is phase locked with the carrier
at the transmitter. The detection is done by correlating received noisy signal and locally generated
carrier. The coherent detection is a synchronous detection.
5. What is the difference between PSK and FSK?
Ans: In PSK, phase of the carrier is switched according to input bit sequence. In FSK frequency of
the carrier is switched according to input bit sequence. FSK needs double of the bandwidth of PSK.
6. What is meant by coherent ASK?
Ans: In coherent ASK, correlation receiver is used to detect the signal. Locally generated carrier is
correlated with incoming ASK signal. The locally generated carrier is in exact phase with the
transmitted carrier. Coherent ASK is also called as synchronous ASK.
7. What is the major advantage of coherent PSK over coherent ASK?
Ans: ASK is on-off signaling, whereas the modulated carrier is continuously transmitted in PSK.
Hence peak power requirement is more ASK, whereas it is reduced in case of PSK
8. Explain the model of bandpass digital data transmission system?
Ans: The bandpass digital data transmission system consists of source, encoder and modulator in the
transmitter. Similarly receiver, decoder and destination form the transmitter.
9. What is matched filter?
Ans: The matched filter is a baseband signal receiver, which works in presence of white Gaussian
noise. The impulse response of the matched response of the matched filter is matched to the shape of
the input signal.
10. What is correlator ?
Ans: Correlator is the coherent receiver. It correlates the received noisy signal 𝑓(𝑡) with the locally
generated replica of the unknown signal x(t). It’s output is denoted as r(t).
11. Bring out the difference between coherent & non coherent binary modulation scheme.
Ans: a. Coherent detection:
In this method the local carrier generated at the receiver is phase locked with the carrier at the
transmitter. Hence it is called synchronous detection.
b. Non coherent detection:
In this method, the receiver carrier need not be phase locked with transmitter carrier. Hence it is
called envelope detection.
12. Highlight the major difference between a QPSK & MSK signal.
Ans: MSK signal have continuous phase in all the cases, whereas QPSK has phase
shift of π/2 or π.
13. List the advantages of Passband transmission
Ans: a. Long distance.
b. Analog channels can be used for transmission.
c. Multiplexing techniques can be used for bandwidth conservation.
d. Transmission can be done by using wireless channel also.
14. List the requirements of Passband transmission.
Ans: a. Maximum data transmission rate.
b. Minimum probability of symbol error.
c. Minimum transmitted power.
UNIT – 4: SPREAD SPECTRUM MODULATION
1. Define spread spectrum communication
Ans: In spread spectrum communication the transmitted data sequence occupies much more band
width than the minimum required bandwidth. Special code is used to spread the bandwidth of the
message signal. This special code is known only to authorize receiver. Hence the transmitted signal
is received only by authorized receiver. Unwanted receivers cannot receive the signal. Thus spread
spectrum communication provides secure transmission of data.
2. What is pseudo noise sequence?
Ans: Pseudo noise sequence is a noise like high frequency signal. The sequence is not completely
random, but it is generated by well-defined logic. Hence it is called “pseudo” noise sequence. Pseudo
noise sequences are used in spread spectrum communication for spreading message signals.
3. What is direct sequence spread spectrum modulation
Ans: In direct sequence spread spectrum modulation, the pseudo-noise sequence is directly
modulated with data sequence. Thus pseudo-noise sequence acts as high frequency carrier and data
sequence acts as low frequency modulating signal. The pseudo-noise sequence and data sequence are
applied to a product modulator. The output of product modulator can be used directly or it can further
generate BPSK signal for long distance communication.
4. What is frequency hop spread spectrum modulation?
Ans: In frequency hop spread spectrum, the data is transmitted in different frequency slots. These
frequency slots are selected with the help of pseudo-noise sequence. Selection of frequency slots is
called frequency hopping. The bandwidth of frequency hop spread spectrum is very much large
compared to direct sequences spread spectrum. Frequency hop spread spectrum is of two types: I)
slow frequency hopping and ii) fast frequency hopping.
5. State four applications of spread spectrum.
Ans: I) Spread spectrum has the ability to resist the effect of intentional jamming
ii) Spread spectrum is used in mobile communications. This is because the spread spectrum signal
has the ability to resist the effects of multipath fading.
iii) Spread spectrum communication are used in distance measurement.
iv) Spread spectrum communications are secure. This secrecy capability of spread spectrum is used
in military as well as in many commercial applications.
6. When is the PN sequence called as maximal length sequence?
Ans: When the PN sequence has the length of 2m - 1, it is called maximal length sequence.
7. What are the applications of spread spectrum modulation?
Ans: (i) Multipath access capability.
(ii) Multipath protection in mobile communication
(iii) Low probability intercept.
(iv) Interference rejection.
(v) To provide antijam capability.
(vi) Distance measurements.
(vii) Selective calling
8. Define frequency hopping.
Ans: The frequency of the carrier is changed (hopped) according to bits of PN sequence.
Types: I) Slow frequency hopping
II) Fast frequency hopping
9. What are the Advantages of DS-SS system.
Ans: 1. This system has best noise and antijam performance.
2. Unrecognized receivers find it most difficult to detect direct sequence signals.
3. It has best discrimination against multipath signals.
10. What are the Disadvantages of DS-SS system. 
Ans: 1. It requires wideband channel with small phase distortion.
2. It has long acquisition time.
3. The pseudo–noise generator should generate sequence at high rates
4. This system is distance relative.
11. What are the Advantages of FH-SS System
Ans: 1. These systems bandwidth (spreads) are very large.
2. They can be programmed to avoid some portions of the spectrum
3. They have relatively short acquisition time.
4. The distance effect is less.
12. What are the Disadvantages of FH-SS System
Ans: 1. Those systems need complex frequency synthesizers
2. They are not useful for range and range-rate measurement.
3. They need error correction.
13. Comparison between DS-SS and FH-SS
Sl. Parameter Direct sequence spread
spectrum
Frequency hop spread
spectrum
1 Definition PN sequence of large
bandwidth is mulitplied with
narrow band data signal
Data bits are transmitted in
different frequency slots
which
are changed by PN
sequence
2 Effect of
distance
This system is distance
relative
Effect of distance is less in
this system
3 Acquisition
time
Acquisition time is long Acquisition time is short
14. What are the Application of Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum Signals?
Ans: Antijamming with the help of direct sequence spread spectrum signals. Low delectability signal
transmission or low probability intercept.
